i despise zoom

> Zoom hasn't killed keybase as far as I know

â€” some asshole on github

[fuck you.][1] the server still isn't open sourced and at this rate it never
will be, so it's just a matter of time.

the [keybase aquisition][2] fiasco is what really started me on this train of
thought because i'd never really used zoom before that anyways. now i have to
use it for virtual classes and i realize how much i hate it, and not just from
an ideological perspective.

the app (on linux at least, but i assume for every platform) is so buggy,
resource heavy (what "professional" app isn't these days though (and it's not
just because of all the video, it's just poorly optimized (i really use a lot
of parentheses don't i :)))), and does seemingly everything just wrong. the
first thing i noticed was that instead of having audio output use the user's
volume, they force the system volume to 100% then make you use the volume
controls built-into the app, which is really great when you want to listen to
something else simultaneously, or when you forget after a call and put on music
and have your eardrums blown out. it makes it impossible to do anything else on
my computer when i'm on a call, but i think that's probably more my computer
struggling to handle video than zoom itself. the only good thing i have to say
about the app is that it's nice that it doesn't still do video in the
background when you have the app minimized to the little mini
picture-in-picture thing, which helps when i'm trying to actually do something
else on my computer too.

the privacy implications of even having it installed is worrying too, and with
them not just routing through china, but actually [generating encryption keys
in china][3] doesn't make me feel confident in the """end-to-end"""
""""""encryption"""""" that they use, even if they have the keybase people
slaving away over it.

i don't really have anything else original to say, but i felt the need to rant
briefly about zoom, primarily because they are slowly killing keybase which was
one my my favorite things.

[1]: /img/blog/f64c39e2-376f-4de1-a101-5b88593eafe9.png
[2]: https://keybase.io/blog/keybase-joins-zoom
[3]: https://theintercept.com/2020/04/03/zooms-encryption-is-not-suited-for-secrets-and-has-surprising-links-to-china-researchers-discover/

tags: miscellaneous, rants
